Take a line ‘l’ and a point ‘A’ outside ‘l’
Take any point B on l and join B to A
With B as centre and a convenient radius, draw an arc cutting l at C and BA at D
Now with A as centre and the same radius as in Step 3, draw an arc EF cutting AB at G
Place the pointed tip of the compasses at C and adjust the opening so that the pencil tip is at D
With the same opening as in Step 5 and with G as centre, draw an arc cutting the arc EF at H
Now, join AH to draw a line ‘m’


Construct a triangle ABC, given that AB = 5 cm, BC = 6 cm and AC = 7 cm.
Draw a line segment BC of length 6 cm.
From B, point A is at a distance of 5 cm. So, with B as centre, draw an arc of radius 5 cm.
From C, point A is at a distance of 7 cm. So, with C as centre, draw an arc of radius 7 cm.
Mark the point of intersection of arcs as A. Join AB and AC.


Construct a triangle PQR, given that PQ = 3 cm, QR = 5.5 cm and ∠PQR = 60°.
Draw a line segment QR of length 5.5 cm.
At Q, draw QX making 60° with QR.
With Q as centre, draw an arc of radius 3 cm. It cuts QX at the point P.
Join PR.


Construct ΔXYZ if it is given that XY = 6 cm, ∠ZXY = 30° and ∠XYZ = 100°.
Draw XY of length 6 cm.
At X, draw a ray XP making an angle of 30° with XY.
At Y, draw a ray YQ making an angle of 100° with YX.
The point of intersection of the two rays is Z.


Construct ΔLMN, right-angled at M, given that LN = 5 cm and MN = 3 cm.
Draw MN of length 3 cm.
At M, draw MX ⊥ MN.
With N as centre, draw an arc of radius 5 cm.
L has to be on the perpendicular line MX as well as on the arc drawn with centre N. Therefore, L is the meeting point of these two.




To construct the bisector of a given angle.
Given an angle ABC, construct its bisector.
Taking B as centre and any radius, draw an arc to intersect the rays BA and BC, say at E and D respectively.
Next, taking D and E as centres and with the radius more than 1/2 DE, draw arcs to ntersect each other, say at F.
Draw the ray BF. This ray BF is the required bisector of the angle ABC.


To construct the perpendicular bisector of a given line segment.
Given a line segment AB, construct its perpendicular bisector.
1. Taking A and B as centres and radius more than 1/2
AB, draw arcs on both sides of the line segment
AB (to intersect each other).
2. Let these arcs intersect each other at P and Q.
Join PQ.
3. Let PQ intersect AB at the point M. Then line PMQ is the required perpendicular bisector of AB.


To construct an angle of 60° at the initial point of a given ray.
Take a ray AB with initial point A. Construct a ray
AC such that ∠CAB = 60°
Taking A as centre and some radius, draw an arc of a circle, which intersects AB, say at a point D.
Taking D as centre and with the same radius as before, draw an arc intersecting the previously drawn arc, say at a point E.
Draw the ray AC passing through E.


To construct a triangle, given its base, a base angle and sum of other two sides.
Given the base BC, a base angle, say ∠B and the sum  AB + AC of the other two sides of a triangle ABC, you are required to construct it.
Draw the base BC and at the point B make an angle, say XBC equal to the given angle.
Cut a line segment BD equal to AB+AC from the ray BX.
Join DC and make an angle DCY equal to ∠BDC.
Let CY intersect BX at A.
Then draw perpendicular bisector PQ of CD to intersect BD at a point A.
Join AC.


To construct a triangle given its base, a base angle and the difference of the other two sides.
Given the base BC, a base angle, say ∠B and the difference of other two sides AB – AC or AC – AB, you have to construct the triangle ABC.
Draw the base BC and at point B make an angle say XBC equal to the given angle.
Cut the line segment BD equal to AB – AC from ray BX.
Join DC and draw the perpendicular bisector, say PQ of DC.
Let it intersect BX at a point A.
Join AC.
Cut line segment BD equal to AC – AB from the line BX extended on opposite side of line segment BC.
Join DC and draw the perpendicular bisector, say PQ of DC.
Let PQ intersect BX at A. 
Join AC.


To construct a triangle, given its perimeter and its two base angles.
Given the base angles, say ∠B and ∠C and BC+CA+AB, you have to construct the triangle ABC.
Draw a line segment, say XY equal to BC + CA + AB.
Make angles LXY equal to ∠B and MYX equal to ∠C.
Bisect ∠LXY and ∠MYX. Let these bisectors intersect at a point A.
Draw perpendicular bisectors PQ of AX and RS of AY.
Let PQ intersect XY at B and RS intersect XY at C. 
Join AB and AC.

Construct a triangle ABC, in which ∠B = 60°, ∠ C = 45° and AB + BC + CA = 11 cm
Draw a line segment PQ = 11 cm.
At P construct an angle of 60° and at Q, an angle of 45°.
Bisect these angles. Let the bisectors of these angles intersect at a point A.
Draw perpendicular bisectors DE of AP to intersect PQ at B and FG of AQ to intersect PQ at C.
Join AB and AC.